Ladies and gentlemen, friends of Tennessee, a very important item of business before
the Senate this week was the mutual security bill.
The President asked the Congress for $4175 million and funds to continue the efforts of
the United States, in aiding the free friendly nations of the world to maintain their strength
and growth in the face of communist Russia.
And I may say in this connection that the President feels that this is the most important
bill before the Congress for the security of the United States and of the free world.
Rather than it passed the bill which calls for $4125 million, a reduction of $20 million
under the President's request, among many amendments offered were two which I voted for.
The first of these calls on the Arab Republic to observe freedom of the seas and the administration
of the Suez Canal.
All nations are affected by this amendment, although the primary need for the provision
was the recent denial of passage to ships of the Israeli Republic.
I do not believe use of this international waterway should be denied to any nation and
was led to take my stand with many of my colleagues in the Senate in favor of this amendment.
And this is the position incidentally that's been taken by the United Nations General Assembly.
Another amendment I for which I voted was defeated, I'm sorry to say.
It called for a reduction of some $200 million in the military aid funds to foreign nations.
It has been my view for a number of years at the success of the free nations and their
striving for strength and peace.
Can best be served in most instances by economic aid rather than pure military aid.
I felt for some time at building up the economic sounds and growth of these nations with technical
systems and other ways we are trying to help make them better bashtons against communism
than just by sending them tanks and guns.
It is for this reason that I have sponsored a resolution in Congress calling for a review
of the NATO nations, many programs of economic aid to underdeveloped and uncommitted nations.
Coordination of our efforts along these lines will do much.
I believe to reduce duplication and to eliminate waste.
It will also go a long way toward more sharing of the expense burden by channeling aid from
other allies into the areas where we must win friends and keep them in the coal war.
And unfortunately continues relentlessly.
In summation I would like to make this observation about the mutual security program and what
it stands for.
There are some who will say that it is purely a foreign giveaway.
There are others who will in the name of waste seek to put an end to this vital program.
I think the most charitable thing that can be placed on such views is to say that they
are not fully enlightened.
I believe that such views must spring from either blandness to the facts of life in the
world today or from a failure to face these facts.
I agree that there have been many instances of waste and many of our programs.
And we must eliminate these wherever we can.
But we do not cut off our hand to cure an infected finger.
And we cannot afford to forget that missiles and science have turned thousands of miles
into minutes in 1960.
And have made next door neighbors out of people's tens of thousands of miles away.
Our global neighbors include friends and foes and many thousands of people who have made
no commitments to either side.
Our own security in our very living rooms here at home depends upon finding the answers
to the security of our friends who stand with us against Russia.
Mutual security is not an idle phrase.
It is not a foreign giveaway.
It is I assure you life and death to all of us.
And we must continue to support it and to fight for it against those who would cut it to
ribbons.
In these requests come before the Senate Appropriations Committee, I will continue my every effort
to see that they are not reduced to the danger of the nation.
I think as we go on that some reductions may be necessary.
We want to improve the programs.
And above all, we want to bring all of our allies into the extent that we care to share
the burden of them.
The President of the United States incidentally at a large meeting this week in Washington
has spoke very strongly in favor of the Mutual Security Program and I am sure that most
of you have heard his message.
Thank you very much.
That's all for now.